Vocabulary 1 –Composition, Creative Brainstorming, Craftsmanship, Subject Matter, Content, Form, Context, Representational, Naturalism, Abstraction, Non-representational/Objective, Unity, Rule of Thirds, Contrast, Alignment, Repetition, Proximity, Harmony, Balance, Symmetry, Asymmetrical Balance.

Vocabulary 2 – Line, Shape, Space, Actual Lines, Implied Lines, Psychic Lines, Curvilinear, Rectilinear, Geometric, Organic/Biomorphic, Complex Shape, Positive Space, Negative Space, Figure/ Ground Reversal, Background, Concave Shapes, Convex Shapes, Emphasis, Focal Point, Visual Flow, Concept, Critique.

 

BRAINSTORMING, CREATIVE – Specific techniques for generating many ideas and possibilities either individually or collectively. Creative brainstorming encourages a non-judgmental attitude, rapid generation of ideas, record-keeping, and a willingness to push to the edges for strange and unexpected possibilities within a limited time-frame

COMPOSITION – The overall arrangement and organization of formal elements on the two-dimensional surface

CRAFTSMANSHIP – Care in construction and finishing; demonstration of skill and knowledge of processes; attention to detail The quality of design and work shown in something that is made by hand.

SUBJECT MATTER – The person, object, event, or idea on which an artwork represents. One of the Components of Art along with Content and Form (some authors also include Context.)

CONTENT – The emotional and/or intellectual meaning or message of an artwork. May include your emotional, intellectual, symbolic, spiritual, and/or narrative intentions. One of the Components of Art along with Subject Matter and Form (some authors also include Context.)

FORM – In 2D is the visual aspect of a composition, the structure, and the work as a whole; in 3D refers to the actual objects with volume and structure. It is the Component of Art that refers to the physical qualities of a design as opposed to the subject matter (the identifiable visual object, person or element in nature) or content behind a design. One of the Components of Art along with Subject Matter and Content (some authors also include Context.)

CONTEXT – Historical, Religious, Cultural, Social, Political, Ethnical, Geographic, Gender, influences that inform and influence the artist, the artwork and the viewer of the artwork. Considered one of the Components of Art along with Subject Matter, Form and Content.

REPRESENTATIONAL – Refers to works of art that have recognizable subject matter; can be naturalistic or abstract, but remains “representation” in that there is a recognizably represented subject.

NATURALISM – A Degree of Representation based on literal or closely-observed depictions of the natural world. Art that aims to depict the physical appearance of things

ABSTRACTION – A visual representation that may have little resemblance to the real world. Abstraction can occur through a process of simplification or distortion of form in an attempt to communicate an essential aspect of the subject matter or content.

NON-OBJECTIVE/NON-REPRESENTATIONAL – A work of art that has no reference to or basis in observed reality. The elements, their organization, and their treatment by the artist are entirely personalized and, consequently, not associated by the observer with any previously experienced natural objects. The artist relies on Form and Content to express the artwork's message.

UNITY – The degree of agreement existing among the elements in a composition. The oneness, or wholeness in a design that occurs when all parts work together to create a cohesive whole. Principle of Organization.

CONTRAST – The juxtaposition of opposing elements (color or value, size, position, etc.); allows us to emphasize or highlight key elements by breaking or disrupting an established order or system. Degree of difference between compositional parts or between one image and another. High contrast tends to be eye-catching and is often used by graphic designers to create dynamic, highly readable images.

ALIGNMENT – Lining up shapes or forms, usually along edges or centers; allows us to create order, organization, and visual connection between elements.

REPETITION – Using the same visual element over again within the same composition; used to create visual order or connection.

PROXIMITY – The degree of closeness in the placement of elements; shapes or forms placed near one another are frequently interpreted as similar, and this is used to create visual order or connection.

SYMMETRY – A quality of a composition or form wherein there is a close or precise correspondence of elements on either side of a center axis or point; implies formality, tradition, stability. Symmetrical Balance is created when shapes are mirrored on either side of a central axis, as in a composition that is vertically divided down the center.

ASYMMETRICAL BALANCE – Balance achieved with dissimilar shapes/forms that have equal visual weight or visual interest; implies activity, motion, modernism

LINE – A visual element of length; it can be created by setting a point in motion.

SHAPE – A visually perceived area created either by an enclosing line or by color and value changes defining the outer edges. An Element of Design.

SPACE – Refers to the distance or area between, around, above, below, or within elements; both positive and negative space are important factors to be considered in every design.

ACTUAL LINE – An actual line is a line drawn with a tool on a support-- such as a line of charcoal on a piece of paper. Different media (pencil, pen and ink, conte crayon, pastel) create different linear characteristics which affect the emotional and representational qualities of the work.

IMPLIED LINE – Is the illusion of a line created by a series of points positioned close to each other. A line in an artwork that is not physically there but suggested by points in the artwork.

PSYCHIC LINE – Occurs when something looks or points in a certain direction. Our eyes invariably follow. There is no real line, but there is a mental connection between elements.

CURVILINEAR – A shape which is dominated by curves and flowing lines.

RECTILINEAR – A shape whose edges are created by straight lines and angular corners.

GEOMETRIC SHAPE – A shape that appears related to geometry; such as a triangle, rectangle, square or circle.

ORGANIC SHAPE – A shape based on forms from the natural world or suggestive or living organisms.

FOCAL POINT – The location in a composition that attracts the viewer’s attention and may repeatedly draw attention back to itself.

POSITIVE SHAPE – The principal or foreground shape in a design, often the subject; the dominant shape or figure in a figure-ground relationship.

NEGATIVE SPACE – The space between objects or the “empty” space: 1. The unoccupied or empty space left after the positive elements have been created by the artist. 2. A shape created through the absence of an object rather than through the presence of an object. The arrangement and organization of negative spaces is as important, if not more important, as the arrangement and organization of positive shapes in any successful composition.

FIGURE/GROUND VALUE REVERSAL – The “ground” is the background and “figure” is a shape in it. When the value within a figure changes from light to dark, the area of the figure that is darker is surrounded by a lighter value in the ground and the area of the figure which is lighter is surrounded by a darker value in the ground.

EMPHASIS – Similar to the pictorial idea of focal point; special attention given to some aspect of a composition to increase its prominence.

FOCAL POINT – The location in a composition that attracts the viewer’s attention and may repeatedly draw attention back to itself.

CRITIQUE – Any means by which the strengths and weaknesses of designs are analyzed. Common strategies include comparisons, description, formal analysis and inventing alternatives.

SUBJECT MATTER – The person, object, event, or idea on which an artwork represents. One of the Components of Art along with Content and Form (some authors also include Context.)

RULE OF THIRDS – When the picture plane is divided into thirds both vertically and horizontally as a tool to arrange and organize elements of a composition. Important compositional elements should be placed along those lines or at their intersections.

HARMONY – The pleasing combination of parts the make up a whole composition

BALANCE – A sense of equilibrium achieved by manipulating the visual elements. The equilibrium of opposing or interacting forces in a pictorial composition. A Principle of Organization.

 